Migration to a new framework for doc testing (#7465)
istio/istio.io: tests/README.md

# Testing istio.io Content

> **NOTE: We are now migrating to a new test framework. The following content is updated for the new framework.**
> 

Reviewer: We are going to do a one time switch, no migrating, so you don't need to say anything about it in here.
```suggestion
```

These tests use the framework defined in the `istioio` package, which is a thin wrapper
around the [Istio test framework](https://github.com/istio/istio/wiki/Istio-Test-Framework).

> [UPDATE NEEDED] Run the following command to see the current test coverage, including the list of documents

Reviewer 2: Should we add TODOs and reference tracking bugs?

Author: What steps does "reference tracking bugs" translate to? I'm not sure if there's an inventory of TODOs to keep them.

Reviewer 2: Ah right ... Usually we do something like `TODO(https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/<number>`. It just helps readers know that this work is scheduled and gives them a way to track the progress.

that are in need of a test:

```sh

> # TODO(https://github.com/istio/istio.io/issues/7508): update for the new test framework

Reviewer: The `make test_status` command is unaffected by this framework change.
```suggestion
```

Author: Oh I added this because I saw this [comment](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1r_NoxatNjzPsw0eXr6_9W0rqlkfelt7QfN2y5TF0yTo/edit?disco=AAAAJlQR_W4). I thought you might want to determine whether a doc has a test by checking if there's a test.sh next to snips.sh

Reviewer: That will get even more confusing if there are mutliple test.sh files (so the doc might be partially tested). I think we should stick to the rule that if a PR adds a snip.sh file, it also MUST include the corresponding test, at least for now. We can reconsider in the future, if it doesn't work out well.

   Fix the errors, if any, by updating the corresponding command in the `index.md` file and
   then regenerate the snips.

1. Create your test bash script `test.sh` next to the `snips.sh` you have just generated. Scripts that have other names will be ignored.

## Test Bash Script

Your bash script will consist of a series of test steps that call the commands in your generated `snips.sh` file, as well as a series of cleanup steps that should be run after everything is done.

> NOTE (for old framework authors): your script doesn't need to include the `snips.sh` or `util/samples.sh` any more. They will be automatically sourced and you can directly call any function defined in them:

Reviewer: Auto source `snips.sh` is fine, but I don't think we want to do that with `util/samples.sh` because many tests don't need it. In fact, as we write more tests, we may find that there are other common utils that are only needed by a different set of tests (e.g., utils shared by several observability tests) that will be in a similar optional include file (e.g., util/observe.sh). Those kinds of helper functions should not be auto sourced.

Author: Sounds reasonable. I'll leave this sourcing up to the test authors. What about `util/verify.sh`? I think sourcing this should be fine.

Author: A caveat would be that sourcing needs to be done for both test and cleanup: they are now placed in one single file but are actually run in different shells I believe.

Reviewer: There are 4 files that can be auto sourced (since everybody needs them).

1. util/verify.sh
2. util/debug.sh
3. util/helpers.sh
4. snip.sh

Anything else is optional, so it should be explicitly sourced by the test author, instead.

Author: Gotcha! I've made the changes accordingly

   Fix the errors, if any, by updating the corresponding command in the `index.md` file and
   then regenerate the snips.

> 1. Create your test bash script `test.sh` next to the `snips.sh` you have just generated. Scripts that have other names will be ignored.

Reviewer 2: @frankbu Is `make snips` automatically called from `make gen`? If not it should be. The `gen` target is used by CI to determine if all generated files are up-to-date.

Reviewer: Yes it is.

   Fix the errors, if any, by updating the corresponding command in the `index.md` file and
   then regenerate the snips.

> 1. Create your test bash script `test.sh` next to the `snips.sh` you have just generated. Scripts that have other names will be ignored.

Reviewer: #7501 is a WIP PR that is using making 3 different tests for the same doc/snip.sh. I'm not sure if that's a good idea (still need to see where that's going, and review), but if we decide it reasonable, maybe you should switch this back to running bash scripts with the suffix `test.sh` (your original design), instead of exactly `test.sh`. Most tests would still be just named `test.sh` but if somebody want's to split it into more than one bash script, they can have something like `part1_test.sh` and `part2_test.sh` in the same directory, and the framework will run both.

Author: Sounds reasonable. I'm allowing flexibility on the script name. How about stating it like this:
```suggestion
1. Create your test bash script `test.sh` next to the `snips.sh` you have just generated. The bash script name(s) should only have `test.sh` as their suffix. Scripts with other suffixes will be ignored.
```

Reviewer: Here's my suggestion:
```
1. Create a test bash script named `test.sh` next to the `snips.sh` you have just generated.
   If your document is very large and you want to break it into multiple tests, create multiple scripts with the suffix `test.sh`, instead.
   Other scripts in the directory will be ignored.
```

## Test Bash Script

Your bash script will consist of a series of test steps that call the commands in your generated `snips.sh` file, as well as a series of cleanup steps that should be run after everything is done.

> To begin with the test steps, there should always be one line that specifies the istio setup configuration for the test. The setup line should take the form of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before the test steps, there should be one line that specifies the istio setup configuration for the test. The setup line should take the form of
```

```sh
# @setup <setup_config>
```

> Currently supported setup configurations include: `profile=default` for installing default profile, `profile=demo` for installing demo profile, and `profile=none` for not installing istio at all. This line can be placed anywhere before the cleanup steps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently supported setup configurations include: `profile=default` to install the default profile, `profile=demo` to install the demo profile, and `profile=none` to not installing istio at all.
```

> After setup, you will use snippets generated from the docs to write tests. The framework automatically sources several bash scripts for you, including the generated `snips.sh` and `tests/util/[verify|debug|helpers].sh`. You can directly call any function defined in them. For other test utilities, e.g., `util/samples.sh`, you need to source them by yourself:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After setup, you will use snippets generated from the docs to write tests. The framework automatically sources several bash scripts for you, including the generated `snips.sh` and `tests/util/[verify|debug|helpers].sh`. You can directly call any function defined in them. For other test utilities, e.g., `util/samples.sh`, you need to source them yourself:
```

   1. For each line in `expected` with the prefix "- " there must be no line in
      the output containing the following string.

1. **`_verify_failure`** `func`

   Runs `func` and confirms that it fails (i.e., non-zero return code). This function is useful
   for testing commands that demonstrate configurations that are expected to fail.

After all test steps are run, add
```sh
#! cleanup
```
as a single line followed by the cleanup steps that clean up all the resources. These steps can also directly call the functions defined in `util/samples.sh` and `snips.sh`.

## Running the Tests

Run
```bash
make doc.test
```
to start testing all docs in the content folder within a `kube` environment. This command takes two optional environment variables. One is `ENV` that specifies the test environment (either `native` or `kube`), and is `kube` by default. The other is `TEST` that specifies the tests to be run using the name of the directory. For example, the command
```bash
make doc.test TEST=traffic-management
```

> will run all the tests under `traffic-management` folder. The `TEST` variable also accepts multiple test names separated by commas, for example,

Reviewer: Now that the tests are in the content tree, there may be more folders with the same name (e.g., under /docs/tasks and under /docs/ops), so you will need to qualify the names (e.g., TEST=tasks/traffic-management)

Author: Sounds good! I'll document that. I didn't see snips.sh files under docs/ops so I thought it might not be a problem as the framework would only find `test.sh` files

```bash

> make doc.test TEST=request-routing,fault-injection

Reviewer: Same comment as above ... need to qualify tests (TEST=tasks/traffic-management/request-routing,tasks/traffic-management/fault-injection)

   1. For each line in `expected` with the prefix "- " there must be no line in
      the output containing the following string.

1. **`_verify_failure`** `func`

   Runs `func` and confirms that it fails (i.e., non-zero return code). This function is useful
   for testing commands that demonstrate configurations that are expected to fail.

After all test steps are run, add
```sh
# @cleanup
```

> as a single line followed by the cleanup steps that clean up all the resources. These steps can also directly call functions defined in the auto-sourced scripts as described before. But others like `util/samples.sh` need to be sourced again in cleanup, even if you have already sourced them for the test steps.

Reviewer: > But others like `util/samples.sh` need to be sourced again in cleanup

That seems kind of ugly. Won't the bash linter complain about that? How about the framework look for any `source` lines in the main script, and put a copy in the cleanup script?

Reviewer: Another sort of related thought ... would it make sense to leave the cleanup steps in the main bash script, in addition to putting a copy in the cleanup script? Then in the "successful completion" (common) case, the test is completely finished after the main script completes. Only in the failure case, would you have to run the cleanup script. That would seem nicer to me (and more efficient, since you won't need to re-source all the includes).

Author: Personally I'd prefer the first approach. The cleanup steps will be run anyway as they are `defer`-ed, and re-sourcing files are only minimal overhead compared to test themselves.

Reviewer: If you leave the cleanup steps in the main script, you would not `defer` the cleanup script. Instead you would just run the main script, if success you're done, if failure you run the cleanup script. I'm not sure, though, if the underlying istio test framework gives you the hooks to do that, but if it does, that does seem nicer to me.

That said, it's not a big deal, so whatever you decide is fine.

Author: This is now resolved with the first solution as the istio test framework doesn't seem to allow that much flexibility.

   1. For each line in `expected` with the prefix "- " there must be no line in
      the output containing the following string.

1. **`_verify_failure`** `func`

   Runs `func` and confirms that it fails (i.e., non-zero return code). This function is useful
   for testing commands that demonstrate configurations that are expected to fail.

> After all test steps are run, add

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After all test steps are complete, add the following line to indicate the start of the cleanup steps.
These steps will be run by framework, even if the test fails and prematurely exits.
```

```sh
# @cleanup
```

> on a single line, followed by the cleanup steps that clean up all the resources. These steps can also directly call functions defined in the auto-sourced scripts described before, as well as any script you have sourced by yourself for the test steps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following cleanup steps must remove all resources and reverse configuration changes made during the test steps. These steps can also directly call functions defined in the auto-sourced scripts described before, as well as any script you have sourced by yourself for the test steps.
```

## Running The Tests

Run
```bash
make doc.test
```
to start testing all docs in the content folder within a `kube` environment. This command takes three optional environment variables: `TEST`, `TIMEOUT` and `ENV`.

`TEST` specifies the tests to be run using the name of the directory. For example, the command
```bash
make doc.test TEST=traffic-management
```

> will run all the tests under `traffic-management` folder. The `TEST` variable also accepts multiple test names separated by commas, for example,

Reviewer: run all tests under `traffic-managment` folder makes no sense. What `traffic-managment` folder? There are several. I think you should require a full path to the doc relative to `content/en/docs`. So it could be `TEST=tasks/traffic-managment` or `TEST=ops/configuration/traffic-managment` or `TEST=ops/best-practices/traffic-management` or other. Just giving the short name is confusing and not helpful.

Author: How about [this](https://github.com/istio/istio.io/pull/7465/files#diff-62f0ff60ede3b78b9c95624e2f61d6c1R169)? I suggest it would be the recommended practice to specify full paths.

Reviewer: If you allow anything other than the full path, you need to explain how it works, and to be honest, I can't see a sensible answer. What happens if the user says "TEST=foo", or "TEST=foo/bar", or "TEST=foo/bar/baz"? Are you going to scan the entire repo looking for all parent directories that have the specified subdir(s)? It seems like a big complication for a small gain. Users will typically be using this feature to test a doc that they know the full path for, so copy and pasting that after the `TEST=` part of the command is pretty easy and straightforward.

Author: The current way of matching tests is to traverse through the entire folder and check if a path contains ${TEST} as a substring, so ``foo/bar/baz`` will match short paths like `foo`, `bar`, `foo/bar` and also the full path `foo/bar/baz`. Okay I see this is kind of confusing once I explain it... let me change that.

Author: This is now done by the latest commit. Take a look!

```bash
make doc.test TEST=request-routing,fault-injection
```
In case there are two folders that share the same name and both have `test.sh` files present, more detailed specification of test file paths can tell them apart. For example,
```bash
make doc.test TEST=tasks/traffic-management
```

`TIMEOUT` specifies a time limit exceeding which all tests will halt, and the default value is 30 minutes (`30m`). `ENV` specifies the test environment (either `native` or `kube`), and is `kube` by default.

You can also find this information by running `make doc.test.help`. The bash tracing output for debugging will be kept in `out/*_[test|cleanup]_debug.txt`.

### Notes

> 
> NOTE: The following were written for the old test framework and has NOT been tested on the new framework.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

1. If HUB and TAG aren't set, then their default values will match what is used by the prow tests.

> ## Migrate from Old Framework

Reviewer: I don't think we want to document migration instructions. As soon as the new framework is ready, we can do a one-time conversion of the existing 22 tests in a single PR, and also in the same PR remove the old framework code.

Author: Sounds good! I'll remove this part

1. If HUB and TAG aren't set, then their default values will match what is used by the prow tests.

> ## Adding A Setup Configuration

Reviewer: This is advanced framework customization, not something we want to encourage test authors to do, so I don't think we want this in this README. How about moving it to another README in `tests/setup/`.

Author: Sounds good!
